Expand app quick start guides (#1106)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/integrate/apps/quickstart/_index.md

---
title: Developer setup
description: Developer setup and guides for quickly getting started building apps
weight: 10
aliases:
  - /integrate/apps/quick-start-developer-setup
---

To get started making Mattermost Apps, the first thing you need to do is set up your development environment via the [mattermost-app-examples repository](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples). Then you can follow language-specific guides to get started with the Apps Framework, or just start tinkering on your own.

## Prerequisites

You need [the latest version of Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) installed.

## Set up your development environment

Clone and enter a local copy of the [mattermost-app-examples repository](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples) with the following command:

```sh

> git clone https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples && cd mattermost-app-examples

Author: I'd like to keep it just for the sake of clarity and ease of copy/paste for the developer.

```

When you're developing your own app, you need an actual Mattermost server to be running. The development environment accomplishes this by using a [`docker-compose.yml`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples/blob/master/docker-compose.yml) with a network named `mattermost-apps-dev`. This compose has just two containers: the Mattermost server with a Postgres database. The Mattermost image itself is preconfigured with the ideal settings for app development. 

> Because they exist on a pre-defined network, other `docker-compose.yml` configurations can connect their containers to this development environment by specifying the same `mattermost-apps-dev` Docker network. Then the Mattermost server can be accessed at `http://mattermost:8065` by any other container on the `mattermost-apps-dev` network. Similarly, your own development apps can then be accessed by Mattermost via their service name (e.g., `http://mattermost-apps-typescript-hello-world:4000`). You can learn more about Docker networks on the [official documentation](https://docs.docker.com/network/).

Author: In regards to your first suggestion, I'm mentioning `docker-compose.yml` again on purpose so the second paragraph is in parallel with the first. I want it to be crystal clear for the reader that we're talking about the same file and format, just in other project directories. I added these other suggestions, though. Thanks for them! 🚀

To change the Mattermost Apps plugin or the Mattermost server versions, you can edit [`docker-compose.yml`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples/blob/master/docker-compose.yml).

Next, use the following command to bring your development environment online.

```sh

> docker compose up -d

Author: Looks like you're using an older version of Docker that had a separate docker-compose CLI plugin (e.g., the syntax with `docker-compose`). Refer to [this StackOverflow post](https://stackoverflow.com/a/66526176) and [the Docker docs](https://docs.docker.com/compose/reference/) to see what I mean. `docker compose` is the standard now, the `docker-compose` CLI plugin can be removed.

> docker compose up -d

Reviewer: FWIW I use `docker-compose` out of habit, though the CLI yells at me when I do this (or at least it used to?). 0/5 on what should be used here 🤷

```

> Once Mattermost is online, you can access the server at [http://localhost:8065](http://localhost:8065) and create your superuser account. You can also add `127.0.0.1 mattermost` to your `/etc/hosts` file to be able to access Mattermost at [http://mattermost:8065](http://mattermost:8065), which is the value of `MM_SERVICESETTINGS_SITEURL` for Docker networking.

Author: This is more like an extra tidbit. It does tell them they can access it at `localhost`, but in some cases you may want to be accessing Mattermost at the same URL that your Docker containers are. For example, image paths would be broken because everything in the server is mapped for `mattermost` as the host name, not `localhost`. I moved it to it's own paragraph and added **Tip:** to try and clarify this is just some extra insight.

> Because they exist on a pre-defined network, other `docker-compose.yml` configurations can connect their containers to this development environment by specifying the same `mattermost-apps-dev` Docker network. Then the Mattermost Server can be accessed at `http://mattermost:8065` by any other container on the `mattermost-apps-dev` network. Similarly, your own development Apps can then be accessed by Mattermost via their service name (e.g., `http://mattermost-apps-typescript-hello-world:4000`). You can learn more about Docker networks in the [official documentation](https://docs.docker.com/network/).

Author: Great idea, I will incorporate this!

> **Tip:** You can also add `127.0.0.1 mattermost` to your `/etc/hosts` file to be able to access Mattermost at [http://mattermost:8065](http://mattermost:8065), which is the value of `MM_SERVICESETTINGS_SITEURL` for Docker networking.

Author: Great idea, adding this tidbit.

To temporarily stop the container (and preserve your database), use the following command:

```sh
docker compose stop
```

To stop and clean up the database (for a fresh start), use the following command:

```sh
docker compose down
```

Now you're fully equipped with the ideal environment to develop Mattermost apps locally! 

## Quick start guides

The following quick start guides can help you start developing a Mattermost app in different languages:

| Language                | Guide                                                                                             |
|-------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Golang                  | [Hello World in Go]({{< ref "/integrate/apps/quickstart/quick-start-go" >}})                      |

> | Golang                  | [JWT in Go]({{< ref "/integrate/apps/quickstart/quick-start-jwt" >}})                                   |

Author: My thinking is we don't really have another place to put these kinds of guides right now. They're all very introductory looks at how Apps work, and follow the same kind of format and structure. They're also housed in the same repository. I think it makes sense to keep them together, until maybe we have more and it becomes more clear how to divide and reorganize them — and that would be a great problem to have! 🙂

I'd also eventually like to get the guides for lifecycle, oauth2, and webhooks set up in the same way (in future PRs). At that point, it would maybe make more sense to divide them into their own set of guides.

---

> title: Apps - Developer setup

Reviewer 2: I think the extra "Apps" looks redundant in the LHS. Would the reader not know they're in the Apps section?

Author: It's not redundant in the page title, which could benefit from the clarity. @mickmister makes a good point that if you open up a few tabs, it's hard to tell what is what in Chrome just by their names. I think this is something we would need to address across all of the docs, but I think it works okay here for now. 1/5

Reviewer 2: Agreed. :)

To change the Mattermost Apps plugin or the Mattermost Server versions, you can edit [`docker-compose.yml`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples/blob/master/docker-compose.yml).

You'll need to create a `.docker.env` file in the same directory as the `docker-compose.yml` file in order to complete the Docker Compose configuration. Use this file to store any secrets or any other environment variables you wish to use with the Mattermost server. Check out the [`.docker.env.example`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples/blob/master/.docker.env.example) file in the examples repository to see some secrets you may want to use while building Apps. The `.docker.env` file is ignored in the repository's `.gitignore` file, so these secrets won't be committed to the repository if you make any edits.

Next, use the following command to bring your development environment online.

```sh

> docker compose up -d

Author: This is actually a separate issue that has to do with using the Docker image with certain file permissions. This can also happen if you try to have Docker use pre-existing folders (maybe folders that were generated during a previous start, and have different permissions). This has been reported by other users, and I have also experienced it.

For me, it's usually fixed by deleting the folders used by Dockers, making sure new folders are created and have the right perms (step #3 [here](https://docs.mattermost.com/install/install-docker.html)), and/or adding `user: 0:0` to my `docker-compose.yml`.

git clone https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples && cd mattermost-app-examples
```

When you're developing your own App, you need an actual Mattermost Server to be running. The development environment accomplishes this by using a [`docker-compose.yml`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples/blob/master/docker-compose.yml) with a network named `mattermost-apps-dev`. This Docker Compose file has just two containers: the Mattermost Server and a Postgres database.

> The Mattermost image itself is preconfigured with settings for local App development but you can customize them. For example, the `MM_SERVICESETTINGS_SITEURL` environment variable is set to `http://mattermost:8065` on the Mattermost container, but you could change this to be any URL, like one from [ngrok](https://ngrok.com/) or [Gitpod](https://gitpod.io/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Mattermost image itself is preconfigured with settings for local App development but you can customize them. For example, the `MM_SERVICESETTINGS_SITEURL` environment variable is set to `http://mattermost:8065` on the Mattermost container, but you could change this to be any URL, like one from {{<newtabref title="ngrok" href="https://ngrok.com/">}} or {{<newtabref title="Gitpod" href="https://gitpod.io/">}}.
```

To change the Mattermost Apps plugin or the Mattermost Server versions, you can edit [`docker-compose.yml`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples/blob/master/docker-compose.yml).

You'll need to create a `.docker.env` file in the same directory as the `docker-compose.yml` file in order to complete the Docker Compose configuration. Use this file to store any secrets or any other environment variables you wish to use with the Mattermost server. Check out the [`.docker.env.example`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples/blob/master/.docker.env.example) file in the examples repository to see some secrets you may want to use while building Apps. The `.docker.env` file is ignored in the repository's `.gitignore` file, so these secrets won't be committed to the repository if you make any edits.

Next, use the following command to bring your development environment online.

> 

Reviewer 2: The commands below will fail with Docker Engine. Please add notes where necessary to direct the user to the command that works for Docker Engine.

Otherwise, please remove all references to Docker Engine and add a note that only Docker Desktop is supported for developing Apps.

Author: Okay, I'll add a note about using the hyphenated commands if you're on DE with the compose plguin.

To change the Mattermost Apps plugin or the Mattermost Server versions, you can edit [`docker-compose.yml`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples/blob/master/docker-compose.yml).

> Be sure to create a `.docker.env` file in the same directory as the `docker-compose.yml` file to store any secrets. Or you can rename and use [`.docker.env.example`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples/blob/master/.docker.env.example) in the repository to see some example secrets you may use while building Apps.

Reviewer: This is worded in a way that makes me think "in case you need to store secrets, you'll need to create this file", when in reality, it's required to make this run. Feel free to reword parts of the suggestion below:

```suggestion
You'll need to create a `.docker.env` file in the same directory as the `docker-compose.yml` file in order to complete the Docker Compose configuration. Use this file to store any secrets or any other environment variables you wish to use with the Mattermost server. Check out the [`.docker.env.example`](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-app-examples/blob/master/.docker.env.example) file in the examples repository to see some secrets you may want to use while building Apps. The `.docker.env` file is ignored in the repository's `.gitignore` file, so these secrets won't be committed to the repository if you make any edits.
```

Author: Agreed! Great suggestion.
